# NAME

TM2::SSH - TempleScript extension for SSH

# SYNOPSIS

    # not to be used from Perl

# DESCRIPTION

This TempleScript extension provides a vehicle to execute Perl code on a remote machine. When I
write "Perl code" here, then this also implies "shell code", as it is easy to invoke a shell capture
from Perl:

    qx[ls -al]      # also known as "backtick"

Obviously, there are three phases: First open the SSH connection to the remote machine, then execute
one or more Perl code fragments (the results will be delivered back), then let the SSH connection go
away. This is easily achieved with a \_junction\_:

       ( "qx[ls]" )           # the shell command to be executed
     |-{
         ( "localhost" ) |->> ts:fusion( sshp:pool ) => $ssh
     ||><||                   # signals to TS that the following is not automatically collapsing
         <- 2 sec | @ $ssh
     }-|->> io:write2log

In the above case we use a single string as incoming block. For this block first the SSH connection
will be erected using the \`ts:fusion\` function. Once that is established that small block is also
pushed into second stage of the junction. It will pass unharmed the \`2 seconds\` disabler (while
starting it) and will move into the \`$ssh\` stream handler.

Hereby a single tuple will be interpreted as such, that the first value in the tuple is used as Perl
code, the other values in the tuple as optional arguments. For example,

     ( "open FILE, '>', $_[0]; print FILE $_[1]; close FILE;",
       "foo.txt",
       "Hello, world!" )

or

     ( "unlink", "foo.txt" )

Any result of a single execution will be returned as ONE string, even if it consists of several lines.

The "2 seconds" disabler takes care that the SSH connection is only used for incoming blocks within
these 2 seconds. After this the connection will be shut down, unless another block arrived within
these 2 secs. Any later blocks would open a new connection.

Beware of the default \*connection timeout\* the binary `ssh` has, as that can be pretty long. If you
ask to connect to a slow machine (or your DNS is slow), then the disabler might kick in earlier,
leading to quite erratic and confusing behaviour. You might want to throw in an SSH option (see
below), such as `ConnectionTimeout=1`.

One can also use TempleScript's mechanism to maintain long-living SSH connections, either by
increasing the scope of the variable **$ssh**; or by not disabling the **$ssh** stream at all.

If you pass in a block of several tuples into **$ssh**, then the individual tuples will be executed
separately; but the coherence of the block on the outgoing side will be maintained.

## URI Addressing

Naming the target host by itself is a convenient and fast-and-loose way, but occasionally you need
to be more specific about the modalities of the SSH connection to be built. For this reason, we
adopt partially the URI format proposed in [SSH URI draft](https://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-salowey-secsh-uri-00.html):

    ssh://somehost.org
    ssh://somehost.org:1234
    ssh://someuser@somehost.org

### SSH Options

This also includes all options mentioned in the \[SSH man page\](https://man.openbsd.org/ssh#o), e.g.
as in

    ssh://someuser;IdentityFile=/home/someuser/.ssh/id.rsa@somehost.org

or even with making explicit the SSH fingerprint to be acceptable:

    ssh://someuser;IdentityFile=/home/someuser/.ssh/id.rsa;FingerprintHash=12:....:34@somehost.org

### Options as Topic Attributes

Adding options directly to the URI might provide the sense of urgency; another way is to provide SSH
options as attributes to the `sshp:pool` topic, or a subclass thereof:

    sshp:pool
    ssh:ConnectTimeout : 3
    sshp:multiplicity  : 4

Anytime an instance of something of this type is generated by the `fusion` function, all attributes
within the `ssh` and `sshp` namespace will be added to the object constructor.

Note, that while merging of these attribute options and direct embedding in the URI works,
overriding does not (yet).

## Host Lists

If you provide a single host or URI to the `fusion` function, then this host will be the primary
target of the SSH connections to be made later.

It is also possible to provide several hosts:

     ( "host1", "host2", "host3" ) |->> ts:fusion( sshp:pool ) => $ssh

In that case the 3 hosts form a pool and there will be one connection per host. When incoming tuple
blocks arrive at the **$ssh**, the tuples will be split up evenly (round-robin) among the hosts, and
that concurrently. The order of returned results is not guaranteed (yet) and is undeterministic.

If **only one** host connection fails, or breaks down during execution, then an exception is
raised. So there is no recovery from that. But:

### Additional Options

With the options below the resilience of the pool can be controlled to some extent:

- **optional**

    If you throw in `optional=yes` into the list of SSH options, then a failed connection with that
    particular host will **not** result in an exception; TempleScript will just report a line in the
    log, record internally that connection is being defunct and will push the tuple in question to the
    next working connection.

    Only if all of the optional connections failed, an exception will be raised.

- **multiplicity**

    If you throw in `multiplicity=3`, then 3 separate SSH connections will be created to that
    particular host. Setting this number to `0` is ok per-se, but that will not create any connection,
    unsurprisingly.

## Tuple Blocking

As TempleScript delivers incoming data as tuple blocks, each incoming tuple will be directed into
the _next_ working SSH connection within the pool. At this stage, a simple round-robin mechanism is
used for this. All string output will be combined into one string.

Only if responses for **all** tuples of the block have arrived, the results are pushed downstream as
one outgoing block.

## Error Handling

@@@

# HINTS

When you are allowing a program to login automatically into machines with sensitive
data/functionality you may want to take a few precautions:

- Use `authorized_keys` and `known_hosts`:

    Obviously, you do not want to enter the password manually whenever the process tries to open an SSH
    connection, so you may [provision ahead of execution time](https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-difference-between-authorized_keys-and-known_hosts-file-for-SSH).

- Create a dedicated user and `sudo` it:

    To restrict potential harm you should create a dedicated **remote** user, together with its own
    public/private key pair. The secret key you will have to provide in the SSH URI. Here with a user
    `po`:

        ssh://po;IdentityFile=t/po_rsa@localhost

    Also wise it is to limit the user's privileges, even if it is supposed to run commands as
    `root`. As inspiration only, take for instance the following _sudo_ declarations which one could
    store under `/etc/sudoers.d/`:

        po      ALL=(ALL) !ALL
        po      ALL=(root) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/whoami

    Here the user `po` can run as `root`, but only the `whoami` command.

- Fingerprints

    When your remote machines are procured automatically then you do not want to trip over the problem
    that the SSH server's fingerprint is unknown to the client side. One way to deal with this is to
    [add the fingerprint as DNS record](https://emanuelduss.ch/2014/11/15/ssh-fingerprints-im-dns-hinterlegen-sshfp-record/)
    and add the SSH option `VerifyHostKeyDNS=yes` to the client.

    Another option is to retrieve the SSH fingerprint from the server first and use it in the `FingerprintHash` option.

# AUTHOR

Robert Barta, `<rho at devc.at>`

# LICENSE AND COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2021 Robert Barta.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the the Artistic License (2.0). You may obtain a
copy of the full license at:

[http://www.perlfoundation.org/artistic\_license\_2\_0](http://www.perlfoundation.org/artistic_license_2_0)

Any use, modification, and distribution of the Standard or Modified
Versions is governed by this Artistic License. By using, modifying or
distributing the Package, you accept this license. Do not use, modify,
or distribute the Package, if you do not accept this license.

If your Modified Version has been derived from a Modified Version made
by someone other than you, you are nevertheless required to ensure that
your Modified Version complies with the requirements of this license.

This license does not grant you the right to use any trademark, service
mark, tradename, or logo of the Copyright Holder.

This license includes the non-exclusive, worldwide, free-of-charge
patent license to make, have made, use, offer to sell, sell, import and
otherwise transfer the Package with respect to any patent claims
licensable by the Copyright Holder that are necessarily infringed by the
Package. If you institute patent litigation (including a cross-claim or
counterclaim) against any party alleging that the Package constitutes
direct or contributory patent infringement, then this Artistic License
to you shall terminate on the date that such litigation is filed.

Disclaimer of Warranty: THE PACKAGE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER
AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES.
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT ARE DISCLAIMED TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY
YOUR LOCAL LAW. UNLESS REQUIRED BY LAW, NO COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR
CONTRIBUTOR WILL BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THE PACKAGE,
EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
